ORTHOPEDIC CONSULTATION 
CHIEF COMPLAINT: “Pain in both hands as the day progresses” 

HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS: Mrs. Doe is a 45 yo female with history of ankylosing spondylitis who presents with back pain. The pain is in her lower back, including the sacroiliac joints, and she has noticed decreased ability to bend forward to pick up objects. The pain is relatively constant, worse in the morning, and radiates to her left groin. The pain sometimes wakes her from sleep. She has been taking meloxicam (500 mg twice daily) with some improvement. No shortness of breath, cough, or hemoptysis. No pain in other joints. No fevers or chills. No rashes. She has been working as a nanny for 20 years but stopped working 6 months ago due to her symptoms. The back pain made it difficult to lifting small children or helping with light housework. She has also noticed she has difficulty standing from a seated position or lying down at night. She also has trouble with performing chores and iADLs (getting dressed, putting on shoes). Ankylosing spondylitis was diagnosed five years ago at Rheumatology. Prior physical therapy with some improvement in pain. 

PAST MEDICAL HISTORY: Ankylosing Spondylitis

PAST SURGICAL HISTORY: Cesarian Section x1

ALLERGIES: NKDA

CURRENT MEDICATIONS: Meloxicam 500 mg bid

FAMILY HISTORY: No significant family history

SOCIAL HISTORY: 
-Education: Associate degree in early childcare development
-Work: Nanny for 20 years. Currently unemployed
-Home: Patient lives with husband in single family home. Daughter away in college.
-Alcohol: 1-2 glasses of wine during social gatherings
-Drugs: Patient denies the use of illegal substances
-Tobacco: Patient smokes approximately a pack of cigarettes a week but is trying to quit.
-Exercise: patient does not exercise regularly but states she used to have a lot of activity while working with kids when she was working. 

REVIEW OF SYSTEMS:

OBJECTIVE:
VITALS: BP:140/90; P:75: RR:16; Ht:5’6’’; Wt: 160 lbs
PHYSICAL EXAM:
GEN: Sitting in office chair in NAD. Transfers easily into office chair. 
CV: RRR. Regular rate and rhythm. Normal S1-S2, no murmurs, rubs or gallops. Posterior tibial pulses 2+ and symmetric. 
RESP: Normal respiratory effort. Visibly diminished chest expansion. CTAB. No wheezes, crackles, or rhonchi. 
Abdominal exam: Soft, nontender, not distended, BS+. No hepato/splenomegaly.
Musculoskeletal: No visible swelling, erythema, atrophy.  Kyphosis of the thoracic spine with stooped, forward positioning of the neck. Tenderness over sacroiliac joints bilaterally and in lumbar and thoracic spine. No paraspinal muscle tenderness. Active ROM is limited with loss anterior flexion of lumbar spine. Schober’s test +. Strength is 5/5 in upper and lower extremities. 

LABORATORY AND DIAGNOSIS STUDIES (from medical records review):
CBC unremarkable
CMP, CMP, LFTs: Unremarkable
Elevated C-reactive protein (CRP)
HLA B27 positive
X ray PA Sacroiliac joints with erosions and sclerosis bilaterally

ASSESSMENT AND PLAN: 
Ankylosing Spondylitis
Condition not currently well-controlled. Symptoms have forced her to quit her job as a nanny. 
•	Refer back to rheumatology for consideration of daily maintenance therapy
•	Refer to Physical therapy for maintenance of range of motion 
